---
layout: post
title: Welcome class of 2015
---

---
* TOC
{:toc}

---

### Basic information
* **Lecturer**: Yaniv Erlich  [yaniv at  cs döt columbia döt edu]
* **TA**: Sophie Zaaijer [szaaijer82 at gmail döt com]
* **Time**: Friday 12:10-2:00
* **Location**: 825 Mudd
* **Office hours**: Friday 2:00-4:00 (Computer Science Building 505)
* **Credit**: 3 points

## Course Overview

DNA is one of the most ubiquitous forms of information in nature. In the last 20 years, DNA sequencing technologies have evolved at a breathtaking pace, much faster than Moore’s law, revolutionizing multiple domains ranging from personalized medicine to forensics. This course will cover the interface between computer science and the DNA sequencing revolution. Specifically, it will focus on the newest phase of the DNA sequencing revolution: the advent of low-cost mobile devices that can form the basis of 'the Internet of living things’. Students will have hands-on experience with these devices (hackathons), including data gathering and analysis. The first hackathon is "Who is this person" where the students will try to figure out the identity of a person for his/her DNA sequencing data. The second hackathon is "What did I eat" and the students will have to identify an organism from by sequencing its DNA on a mobile sequencer.

## Acknowledgments

The mobile DNA sequencers for this class are generously provided by [Oxford Nanopore](https://www.nanoporetech.com/).


## 2015 Syllabus
{% markdown syllabus.md %}

## Assignments and grading

### Reading assignments
You are expected to read the paper and understand the main concepts and terms before the class.

### Supplemental material
These are mainly review articles that discuss material that will be covered in the frontal class (and much more). It is mainly for reference and curious students. 

### Presentations
The class has a few lessons that include team presentations. The length of each presentation is 10min and will be delivered by one member of the team. To encourage fairness and participation, the presenter will be randomly selected at the beginning of the presentation.

### Coding/Written assignments
Teams are expected to code their own assignments. It is OK to brainstorm high level ideas with other teams. It is OK to consult online forums. However, the submitted code should be fully written by members of the team. No exceptions.
To maximize impact all code should be submitted under the GNUv2 license. 

### Grades

+ Participation in class discussions: 25%
+ Hackathon1: 25% (10% presentation + 15% code submission)
+ Hackathon2: 25% (10% presentation + 15% code submission)
+ Final project: 25%

## Text books
DNA sequencing and genomics are fast moving fields. The course therefore does **not** have a text book and will rely on research manuscripts and reviews.
However, below I listed a few technical and non-technical books for interested students that would like to get a broader perspective on these fields:

+ **A Short Guide to the Human Genome** \| Stewart Scherer (an excellent technical overview of different elements of the human genome, such as the length of each chromosome and what is the longest gene)
+ **Introduction to Quantitative Genetics** \| Falconer (a technical overview that presents the statistical foundations of analyzing the genetic basis traits)
+ **The $1,000 Genome** \| Kevin Davies (an excellent book non-technical book on the history of DNA sequencing)
+ **The Creative Destruction of Medicine** \| Eric Topol (Chapter 5 provides a non-technical overview of sequencing and genomics and their impact on precision medicine)


